docs/WAF: failure zones refresh (#21545)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/architecture/improving-consul-resilience.mdx

# Fault Tolerance

You must give careful consideration to reliability in the architecture frameworks which you build. Building a resilient platform minimizes the future remediation actions for when a failure occurs, and minimizes the possible technical debt that results from uninformed design decisions. This document will provide useful information on how to design and operate a resilient Consul cluster, and what methods and functionalities are at your disposal for this goal.

Consul has a multitude of features that operate both locally, as well as remotely across multiple datacenters that help offer resilient service.

## Introduction

Fault tolerance is the ability of a system to continue operating without interruption

> despite the failure of one or more components. Consul's fault tolerance is determined by the configuration of its voting server agents.

Reviewer: Passive voice

[consensus protocol documentation](/consul/docs/architecture/consensus#deployment_table).

Effectively mitigating your risk is more nuanced than just increasing the fault tolerance
metric described above. You must consider correlated risks at infrastructure-level - these are occasions which can cause multiple servers to fail at the same time. This means that a single infrastructure-level failure could cause a Consul outage, even if your server-level fault tolerance is 2.

What are the costs of the mitigation? Different mitigation options present different trade-offs for operational complexity, computing cost, and Consul request performance.

## Fault tolerance

The following sections explore several options for increasing Consul's fault tolerance. For enhanced reliability, we recommend taking a holistic approach by layering these multiple functionalities together.

- [Spread servers across infrastructure availability zones](#availability-zones)

> - <EnterpriseAlert inline /><a href="#quorum-size">Using backup voting servers to replace lost voters</a>

Reviewer 2: The minimum quorum size does not imply backup servers. Those are two different features. 

```suggestion
- [Use a minimum quorum size to avoid performance impacts](#quorum-size).
```

Take into consideration the following situation with Autopilot enabled: there is a cluster of 5 Consul server nodes. Therefore, quorum is 3 and the cluster can afford to lose only two nodes before the cluster fails. Two of the server nodes fail. These two nodes are redeployed in a cloud environment, which assigns new hostnames and IP addresses to the replacement nodes. Once they rejoin the cluster, Consul treats them as two extra nodes, unrelated to the previously failed. The cluster has now 3 surviving nodes, 2 failed nodes and 2 newly joined nodes - 7 in total. However, because Autopilot is enabled and two new nodes have been introduced to the cluster, it cleans up the entries for the two `Failed` nodes. The final state of the cluster is 3 surviving nodes and 2 newly joined nodes - 5 nodes in total. Quorum is still 3, so the cluster can afford to lose two nodes, and level of redundancy is preserved instantaneously.

> Take into consideration the following situation without Autopilot disabledenabled: there is a cluster of 5 Consul server nodes. Therefore, quorum is 3 and the cluster can afford to lose only two nodes before the cluster fails. Two of the server nodes fail. These two nodes are redeployed in a cloud environment, which assigns new hostnames and IP addresses to the replacement nodes. Once they rejoin the cluster, Consul treats them as two extra nodes, unrelated to the previously failed. The cluster has now 3 surviving nodes, 2 failed nodes and 2 newly joined nodes - 7 in total. However, because Autopilot is not enabled, introducing two new nodes to the cluster does not trigger the clean-up for the two `Failed` nodes. The final state of the cluster is 3 surviving nodes, 2 failed, and 2 newly joined nodes - 7 nodes in total. Quorum is now 4, so the cluster can afford to lose only one node until the two failed nodes are reaped in 72 hours. Therefore, the level of redundancy has decreased compared to the initial state.

Reviewer 3: The scenarios have the same setup and differ only in autopilot enabled vs disabled, so wondering if we can take an "at a glance" presentation approach, something like:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f3018c42-e116-4012-81fa-b8f68c399a6e)

Or in text and bullet points. Something like:

```
To illustrate the Autopilot advantage, this scenario has a cluster of five Consul server nodes. The quorum is three, which means the cluster can lose two nodes before the cluster fails. 

The following events happen:

1. Two server nodes fail.
1. Two replacement nodes are deployed with new hostnames and IPs.
1. The two replacement nodes rejoin the Consul cluster.
1. Consul treats the replacement nodes as extra nodes, unrelated to the previously failed nodes.

_With Autopilot not enabled_, the following happens:

1. Consul does not immediately clean up the failed nodes when the replacement nodes join the cluster.
1. The cluster now has the three surviving nodes, the two failed nodes, and the two replacement nodes, for a total of seven nodes.
   - The quorum is increased to four, which means the cluster can only afford to lose one node until after the two failed nodes are deleted in seventy-two hours.
   - The redundancy level as decreased from its initial state.

_With Autopilot enabled_, the following happens:
1. Consul immediately cleans up the failed nodes when the replacement nodes join the cluster.
1. The cluster now has the three surviving nodes and the two replacement nodes, for a total of five nodes.
   - The quorum stays at three, which means the cluster can afford to lose two nodes without a wait time.
   - The redundancy level remains the same.

Autopilot is default enabled in order to maintain the quorum and redundancy levels of the Consul cluster.
```

> Take into consideration the following situation without Autopilot disabledenabled: there is a cluster of 5 Consul server nodes. Therefore, quorum is 3 and the cluster can afford to lose only two nodes before the cluster fails. Two of the server nodes fail. These two nodes are redeployed in a cloud environment, which assigns new hostnames and IP addresses to the replacement nodes. Once they rejoin the cluster, Consul treats them as two extra nodes, unrelated to the previously failed. The cluster has now 3 surviving nodes, 2 failed nodes and 2 newly joined nodes - 7 in total. However, because Autopilot is not enabled, introducing two new nodes to the cluster does not trigger the clean-up for the two `Failed` nodes. The final state of the cluster is 3 surviving nodes, 2 failed, and 2 newly joined nodes - 7 nodes in total. Quorum is now 4, so the cluster can afford to lose only one node until the two failed nodes are reaped in 72 hours. Therefore, the level of redundancy has decreased compared to the initial state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Take into consideration the following situation without Autopilot enabled: there is a cluster of 5 Consul server nodes. Therefore, quorum is 3 and the cluster can afford to lose only two nodes before the cluster fails. Two of the server nodes fail. These two nodes are redeployed in a cloud environment, which assigns new hostnames and IP addresses to the replacement nodes. Once they rejoin the cluster, Consul treats them as two extra nodes, unrelated to the previously failed. The cluster has now 3 surviving nodes, 2 failed nodes and 2 newly joined nodes - 7 in total. However, because Autopilot is not enabled, introducing two new nodes to the cluster does not trigger the clean-up for the two `Failed` nodes. The final state of the cluster is 3 surviving nodes, 2 failed, and 2 newly joined nodes - 7 nodes in total. Quorum is now 4, so the cluster can afford to lose only one node until the two failed nodes are reaped in 72 hours. Therefore, the level of redundancy has decreased compared to the initial state.

```

### Cluster peering

Linking multiple Consul clusters together to provide service redundancy is the most effective method to prevent disruption from failure. This method is enhanced when you design individual Consul clusters with resilience in mind. Consul clusters interconnect in two ways - WAN federation and cluster peering. We recommend using cluster peering whenever possible.

Cluster peering lets you connect two or more independent Consul clusters using mesh gateways, so that services can communicate between non-identical partitions in different datacenters.

Cluster peering is the preferred way to interconnect clusters because it is operationally easier to configure and manage than WAN Federation. Cluster peering communication between two datacenters runs only on one port on the related Consul Mesh gateway, which makes it operationally easy to expose for routing purposes.

> When you use cluster peering to connect admin partitions between datacenters, you can use Consul’s dynamic traffic management functionalities `service-splitter`, `service-router` and `service-failover` to configure your service mesh to automatically forward or failover service traffic between peer clusters. This way Consul can manage the traffic intended for the service and do [failover](/consul/docs/connect/config-entries/service-resolver#spec-failover), [load-balancing](/consul/docs/connect/config-entries/service-resolver#spec-loadbalancer), or [redirection](/consul/docs/connect/config-entries/service-resolver#spec-redirect).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you use cluster peering to connect admin partitions between datacenters, use Consul’s dynamic traffic management functionalities `service-splitter`, `service-router` and `service-failover` to configure your service mesh to automatically forward or failover service traffic between peer clusters. Consul can then manage the traffic intended for the service and do [failover](/consul/docs/connect/config-entries/service-resolver#spec-failover), [load-balancing](/consul/docs/connect/config-entries/service-resolver#spec-loadbalancer), or [redirection](/consul/docs/connect/config-entries/service-resolver#spec-redirect).

```

nits
